Life is pretty much dominated by the dean and the director of the Ag Experiment Station.
Which one mattered most?
Well, the director of the Ag Experiment Station had the money.
And you need to get along both of them, but the Experiment Station Director had the most part, the biggest part of your budget.
All right, now that was R.D.
Lewis when you started?
That's when I started.
Then who?
Jarvis.
Did he follow?
Well, Jarvis was an associate under Harry for a while.
Did Jarvis follow R.D.
exactly?
Was there no in-between?
Well, R.D.
Lewis was dean and director and Harry was associate director.
And so Harry, in a sense, ran the experiment station.
And then when Harry became dean and director, he made Jarvis associate director and then eventually made Jarvis director.
And then when Jarvis became director, they had a little split.
All right, were there any notable times?
And the other person you had to deal with more than anybody else is provost.
See, department heads, you had to deal a lot with provost.
In your experience, who did you go see first?
Oh, the dean and director.
The dean and director.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And did you ever have any situations you can share where there was a difference of the two people?
When something got hung up?
Yeah.
There were some differences.
It sometimes happened?
Yeah.
Especially when you had a
independent directors like John Hutchison and Jarvis, who are strong-minded and independent, and you'd have some problems maneuvering between John, Jarvis, and Harry.
Because you had to work with all three.
All of them, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I had a three-way reporting relationship.
And the biggest share of the money came from the experiment station.
Okay.
In a personnel decision,
to employ or to terminate, which of those three opinions counted most?
Well, his faculty member, Harry, they deferred.
If it's an extension person, John,
Hutchison passed on every extension employee.
I mean, he made the final decision.
You made a recommendation, but he made the decision.
Describe his management style.
Well, he was an elephant dictator, too.
Okay.
And could be autocratic.
But he's a very reasonable man.
I had a great relationship with John Hutchison.
A lot of department heads here complained in the College of Agriculture that they didn't have control of the extension program, and that there were only two department heads that had control of the extension programs, and that was O.D.
Butler and me.
And so I never had any problem, but I always considered I was an extension, you know.
I figured that I was an extension employee, and I acted like one.
I also put extension on par with everything else.
We didn't have any, I tried not to have any second class citizens.
A lot of departments, extension would be second class, but I tried to always keep them up first class and always try to hire really good people.
So I never had any, I ran my extension program.
I never had John Hutchison never reversed the recommendation I ever made.
What about Harry's management style?
Well, I'd say Harry's management style is even more in tune with Jack Williams.
Harry's very academic, appreciates good faculty.
He's intellectual.
And he's not autocratic.
He's not autocratic.
Now, Jarvis becomes Experiment Station Director in the early 70s?
I can't remember the time frame.
Because he becomes president in 77, early seven.
Yeah.
So he became Experimental Station Director probably in the mid-70s.
Okay.
In 75 or so.
Describe his style.
Well, Jarvis could be more autocratic certainly than Harry.
Jarvis was more territorial in some ways, I think.
But I had a good relationship with Jarvis, and I never had any problem.
And I've heard Jarvis described, and I think that's right, that he's a heck of a good boss, but he's sometimes not a very good employee.
When you were department head, was it advantageous to you at that level that the CEO, chief executive officer of the Texas A&M University was also the chief executive officer of the system?
It didn't make any difference to me.
I was asked that question after I became chancellor.
And in fact, I was asked at one point, why don't you just be chancellor and president?
And I said, you got two people in the cemetery now that did that.
And I don't think you ought to combine those offices.
because chancellor's got one function.
If you do that job well, you can't be president of A&M.
If you do the job president of A&M, you can't do the chancellor.
And the other part is I don't want to be president of Texas A&M.
There's no way I'd ever be president of Texas A&M.
And I was asked why, and I said, well, I'll tell you why.
The president of Texas A&M has no life of his own.
He's on constant call to the faculty, to the students and the former students, and I don't want to, I don't, I'm too much of a private individual to do that.
I don't want to spend my days meeting with student groups, faculty groups, and former student groups seven days a week.
I don't even want to do it two or three days a week.
So because of those kinds of pressures, I wouldn't ever want to be a university president.
And my wife would divorce me.
And the chancellor doesn't have to do that.
Chancellor works with the board and doesn't have to do a little bit of it, but not much.
And you can dictate pretty much what you want to do and not.
But the president of a university like A&M is the ceremonial
Ceremonial stuff is so demanding.
You don't have time to do anything else.
But put those two jobs together is the impossible.
As a department head, did you have any ceremonial responsibilities?
Were there any places you had to show up for something?
Well, you had to show up at the dean's meetings.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
And not much, not much.
I thought the department head, fiscally, the fiscal demands of being department head and intermology department is, and it's probably true of the other ag departments, is really high.
It's the hardest job that I ever did.
It's much harder than being vice president or even chancellor.
Because you have to spend your days listening to faculty and students and their complaints and whatever.
And in our case, you've got 14 centers across the state you've got to deal with.
So it's a tremendous amount of travel and dealing with commodity groups.
And so you can't set your own schedule.
As chancellor, I found I could set my schedule if I told Vicki.
I don't see anybody today unless it's a Regent.
You don't have to see it so you can control your life so that you can get, you know, what I was doing as department head, I sat up here all day listening to the faculty and my door was open.
I didn't want to keep a closed door.
Then I'd come back at night and do the work.
I'd get up here real early in the morning.
During those years, you were department head within the College of Agriculture.
Which of the other department heads were the most influential with the dean and the director?
I think O.D.
and I were.
Who?
O.D.
Butler.
Yeah.
And animal science.
Describe O.D.'
's manner and style.
Well, O.D.
was of the same school style as General Rudder, but he was a team player.
Once a decision was made, he would execute it.
He was extremely well-liked.
by people out in the state in the animal business.
I think he was well liked by his faculty.
If not, he was respected by those who maybe didn't like him, they respected him because he was fair.
And he was a guy who produced results.
And he was open to change.
He was open to change.
And so I'd say in the process of the evolution of A&M, O.D.
and I were, I don't know whether he was the first department head or member of the faculty to become president of the National Professional Society or I was.
But we both were professional, were, I was elected president of the Entomological Society of America in 19,
I was the first person from the southwestern branch and the first person from Texas A&M, and he was elected president of the Animal Science Society about that time.
Were there any other department heads that you think that the dean or the director would have been very quick to hear them after you and OD?
Is there anybody else?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Bob Merrifield was a good department head and then Morris Budworth and Joe Schuster.
Schuster was in what department?
Rains of Sciences.
And John Hopkins over in Ag E. Co.
We had a lot of good department heads and they, they,
I'm not going to ask the negative on this one either.
Which ag departments during the 60s and 70s, other than entomology, do you think made the greatest progress in reputation, quality, etc.?
Which others were moving forward rapidly?
Animal science I think did well.
Soil and crop sciences.
I think ag eco has come on pretty good too.
Biochemistry has had its ups and downs.
Animal science and entomology and soil crop sciences be considered strong departments.
What have we not covered that's on your list there?
Well, as a faculty member,
I was, I received the Alexander Von Humboldt Award.
Let me talk a little bit about that.
In about 1980 for outstanding contributions to agriculture, which is first national, really national, international type award.
And I was first person at A&M to receive that and probably the only one to this day.
And then in 1994 I received the Wolf Prize in agriculture from Israel, first Texan to receive a Wolf Prize.
There are no Nobel Prizes in agriculture, so a Wolf Prize is one of the top international prizes.
And then in 1997 I got the World Food Prize.
I'm the only person at A&M that received those prizes.
In fact, I'm the only person right now that's ever received all three of them.
And I take quite a bit of pride in that.
Justifiably.
and my election to the National Academy.
And, of course, I think it, one, reflects the kind of faculty we have in A&M now.
And I think it also says that if Prairie can be recognized in that way, it means anybody on the faculty has that possibility.
We have elected some more people in the academy.
And we do have some people nominated for the Wolf Prize.
So I'd say one of the things we haven't done well here is getting faculty members recognized at national and international level.
The university doesn't do that well.
I'm going to give you a couple of examples right quick.
O.D.
Butler taught me.
was wondering why in the world all the people in animal science were getting these former student awards and we weren't getting any.
And because I said, hell, my people are better than yours.
But I found out he was nominating them and we weren't.
I said, you know, you got to get people nominated and you got to develop a package and somebody has to do that because these awards don't just fall out of heaven on you.
That's right.
And the university is not
has not and is not doing a good job.
And that's where national, international prestige comes from.
Comes from.
I'm going to give you three examples of what I'm talking about.
Sir Derek Barton was a Nobel Prize winner, died here of a heart attack working in chemistry up to the day he died.
He got a little notice in the obituary column
of Brian Eagle about this long.
Peter O'Donnell in Dallas, who has the O'Donnell Foundation, who's endowed some chairs here anonymously and he's done a lot of work in higher education, sent me a copy of that obituary notice.
Then he put in the same letter, the obituary notice on the New York Times for Sir Derek Martin.
This year, Norman Borlaug received the Vandiver Bush Award for the National Science Foundation.
Next to the National Medal of Science or the Nobel Prize, the Vandiver Bush Award is one of the
You read the list of people who have received that award and it's like reading the who's who of science and the world of the U.S.
which is of the world because Nobel Prize winner after Nobel Prize winner.
Vocal paper didn't have one, there's not been one line about it.
I don't know whether the president of the university
received a notice of that.
Surely must have received an invitation to go to that presentation because it was made in the State Department of the, and probably was attended by the Vice President.
Again, the New York Times carried quite a nice article about that.
Now, we're not even honoring our own people.
That's right.
And you can't go out and recruit some people.
for that reason.
And I had one, one experience I want to relate.
It tells you why this is important.
I always operated on the view that we could recruit anybody.
So I'd say, folks, as I've said earlier in this conversation, let's let the person we're trying to recruit make that judgment about whether they want to come here or not.
Well,
We were recruiting when I was deputy chancellor for agriculture a fellow, the Phil Wolf Welch chair, which is a nice chair.
And we were spending quite a bit of time and money to build up Department of Biochemistry and we had a very dynamic head named Eugene Sander.
You remember Eugene Sander?
Well, Gene knew talent and he knew how to identify it.
So he identified a fellow, a young man at Harvard who was not a tenured professor and came and said, we ought to get somebody working on photosynthesis.
And I said, Gene, I think that's great.
Photosynthesis drives all plant growth and development.
And that I'd say do that if you could find really a,
top person, if you can't find a top person, don't get any."
And he said, I've got one identified.
He said, Harvard, and he is good, and he's not tenured.
He's just starting, but he's done enough post-doc.
And he said, I'll need your help to recruit this person.
I said, you got it.
Let's go get him.
Well, we started on him.
And we had him down here, offered him everything that you could imagine and much more than I knew because Carol Williams was still at Harvard.
I checked him out with Carol.
And so he came down and we couldn't get an answer out of him.
So I said, Gene, let's go.
I'm going to go to Harvard and talk to him.
I'd become acquainted with him, and I said, I'll just go up there and nail this deal.
So I went up there.
He had gotten from Carroll enough background to know what his situation was in Harvard.
But Carroll had already told me, he said, this guy is a cinch to be elected to the academy and probably win a Nobel Prize before he finishes.
So his name is Fred Ausubel.
And I said, Fred, I didn't come up here to take no now.
I know that our offer for salary, for facilities, everything is much better than what you got here.
And hell, you don't even know where you're going to get tenure, you know?
And he said, well, Perry,
everything you say is true, that y'all have offered me a lot more than I'm worth and certainly more than Harvard's offered me.
He says, I think I'll get tenure.
I'm not worried about that.
But he says, I'm not coming to Texas A&M.
And I said, Fred?
tell me why you're not coming to Texas A&M.
Is it location or what?"
No, it's got nothing to do with that.
He said, if I came to Texas A&M and started my career there and stayed there,
I'm kissing goodbye to my chances of being elected to the National Academy of Sciences or any other recognition above that because you guys don't have people.
You can't get elected down there and you can't get the kind of recognition, I believe, that I won't.
And the people you most want to have as colleagues are folks that have those ambitions.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I said, okay, I can buy that.
That's a valid reason.
And we won't worry you anymore.
If you change your mind, give us a call.
But that's a valid reason.
I understand that.
And I came back and I told Gene, I said, well,
I had said that I believe we could compete for anybody, but there are some people we can't compete with.
What else have we left out?
Well, we haven't talked about being chancellor.
No, no, that we'll do another day.
And we haven't talked about the Bush Library.
No, we'll do that another day, and we'll do the deputy.
And the deputy chancellor.
We'll do that another day.
Yeah, okay.
All right, so let's conclude today about faculty with, as you were getting ready to move up in the administrative ladder, of what were you most proud about your years in the Department of Entomology?
Well, I was proud of my personal accomplishments and research and the recognition that I got.
The thing I'm most proud of is being elected National Academy of Sciences.
Sure, sure.
And, but in terms of the department, I was, I'm proud of the department.
and the people I brought here and of the directions we've, the changes we've been able to make so that the entomology department now is not only one of the largest entomology departments in the U.S., but it's also rated, ranked as one of the best.
And we've got faculty members who are internationally known
and highly respected in their fields.
And we've got more than one.
We've got a number of them.
So I've taken a great deal of pride in seeing the people that I was instrumental in recruiting, that they have done in the department what I'd hoped they'd do.
They brought us breath.
They brought us recognition.
They put their students out in other faculty positions.
are now leading people in the field so that you don't have to apologize.
And that's one thing that bothered me about A&M in the early days is you sometimes sort of had to apologize for being at Texas A&M.
But I don't think we have to do that anymore.
Let's quit with that.